1 June 2014

Dear Dr. Matsen:

Decision on USYB-2013-214.R1, Phylogenetics and the human microbiome:

Accept pending minor revisions.

Thank you for the revision of your Systematic Biology submission. It has been reviewed by Associate Editor Prof. Olivier Gascuel and three reviewers. Their comments are listed at the end of this letter. The reviewers and the AE provide some excellent constructive suggestions that I am sure you will appreciate.

I have little to add to the comments of the AE and reviewers other than a few minor editorial issues. I think this is a nice review that will be of interest to both microbiome researchers and phylogeneticists who are curious about how microbiomes are being studied.

1) Pg. 3: “It absolutely requires molecular methods because microbes are now primarily identified by their molecular sequences, which is much more straightforward to do in high throughput than morphological or phenotypic characterization” – This suggests that molecular sequences have traditionally been characterized via morphological or phenotypic means. I suppose that’s indirectly true, but I don’t think it is the best way to describe it.

2) Pg. 10: “Inference of this history is complicated by the fact that any tree-like signal in the overall evolution of bacteria is restricted to a small set of so-called “core” genes” – Would it be more accurate to write that tree-like signal regarding the deep relationships of bacteria is restricted to a small set of so-called “core” genes?  I suspect all genes carry some tree-like signal, even in microbes, though some have been subject to much more lateral gene transfer than others.

3) Pg. 14: “first with a Dirichlet multinomial mixtures on 3-mer profiles” – Should this just be “mixture”?

4) Pg. 15: “However, whereas just about every of the hundreds or thousands of 16S surveys applies an OTU-based alpha diversity estimate” – This requires some modification.  Maybe add “one” after “every”.

5) Pg. 16: “PD under random sub-sampling, which is often applied to enable comparison be- tween samples of different sequencing depths and called “rarefaction curves.”” – Would it be preferable to write that the random subsamples are described (or depicted) with rarefaction curves?

6) Pg. 23: “The apparent success of 16S-tree-based comparisons begs the question of if a more complete representation of the evolutionary history…” – “Begging the question” means something else in philosophical circles. You should probably just use “raises the question” here.

Please acknowledge (by email to sysbio.editorialoffice@oup.com) receipt of the reviews and give a probable time frame for the return of your revised manuscript. Your revision should be submitted as soon as possible. Any revision not received in a timely manner may have to be considered a new submission.

Your revision must comply with our instructions to authors (in this letter, with additional instructions at http://www.oxfordjournals.org/our_journals/sysbio/for_authors). This applies even if your original submission deviated from Systematic Biology style and corrections were not included in the notes from the editors or reviewers. Therefore, READ AND APPLY OUR INSTRUCTIONS BEFORE SUBMITTING A REVISION. Failure to do so will result in significantly delayed processing of your paper. If anything remains unclear after reading the instructions, use recent issues of the journal to find examples. If necessary, feel free to contact the Managing Editor at sysbio.editorialoffice@oup.com for help.

Log into http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/systbiol and enter your Author Center, where you will find your manuscript title listed under "Manuscripts with Decisions." Under "Actions" click on "Create a Revision." Your manuscript number will be appended to denote a revision. Your original files are available to you. Delete the old files and replace them with your modified versions. Files that did not require revision can simply be retained

You will be unable to make your revisions in Manuscript Central. Instead, revise your paper using a word processing program and save it on your computer.
HIGHLIGHT the changes to your manuscript within the document using the track changes mode in MS Word or by using bold, strikethrough, or colored text; any method you choose which indicates all changes made. If a large number of changes were made and you feel the document is too cluttered to read easily with all of them shown, feel free to submit a "clean" copy as well, in which changes are not indicated. If you decide a clean copy would likely be helpful to reviewers and editors, please upload it in the category called Related Files.

When submitting your revised manuscript, address each point made by the Editor, AE and Reviewers IN THE SPACE INDICATED (under "Response to Decision Letter"). Your revision cannot be processed if your responses to reviews are given only in a cover letter. The best way to address each point would be to copy this letter and insert your comments after each point made. Please do not change the order of or delete any of the comments because this makes it difficult to review again and would slow the process. The format of your responses must be compatible with Manuscript Central text fields. For example, colored text is not an option, but you could use asterisks (and numbers, spacing, etc.) to clearly distinguish your responses from the text of the reviews.

Feel free to argue your case, with careful consideration and documentation, if you disagree with any of the suggestions. If you feel a reviewer did not understand a point you made, in your response keep in mind that as an author it is your responsibility to make your points clear to the readers.

DO NOT submit your revision in .pdf format. This applies to the main text, tables, and appendices. Individual figures may be in .pdf format.

In the specific case of papers written using LaTeX, in addition to the .tex (and associated style, bib, or etc. files) please include a .pdf generated from those files. Upload the .pdf in the Manuscript Central category called Related Files.
Figures must be uploaded separately, with each file name including the figure number. No figures may be imbedded in or tied to the .pdf or .tex files.

After you've uploaded your revision, carefully view the Manuscript Central version to verify that all figures and other files display correctly, and that you’ve followed all of our author instructions.

Figures: Each figure must be submitted as an individual file. Make the numbering and lettering as large and clear as possible, without overlapping text. No figures may be imbedded in the document. Captions should not be placed on the figures. Figure portions should be referred to in the text and figure captions using lowercase letters. On the figures themselves, portions should be labeled by a lowercase letter followed by a single parenthesis (e.g., "a)"), located in the upper left area of the figure portion. Line thickness (including graph axes) should be a minimum stroke weight of 0.5pts, and 1.0pts is recommended for most lines. We prefer vector rather than bitmap figure formats. If desired, see http://systbio.org/?q=node/138 for an explanation of the difference. If bitmapped figures are necessary, they should be created at a minimum of 300 dpi (assuming the figure is about 8 inches wide). We accept a wide variety of figure formats as long as the figures are of sufficiently high resolution.

The cost of printed color figures is $600 each. Authors are normally expected to cover this cost, but we do have limited funds available for authors who are SSB members, and cannot pay the full amount. If you feel your circumstances create an unusual financial need, please explain in your cover letter. The maximum allowance is one color figure per paper.
All color costs can be avoided if you decide to have the figures printed in black and white, but be shown in color in the online version of the paper. If you do this, the captions must be worded such that they are appropriate for both situations (e.g., descriptions should not name colors), because the captions in print and online will be identical even if color is used online only. Do not submit two versions of any figure. Instead, make sure the color figure is also easily legible in grayscale, then submit only the color version. In your cover letter, please make your intentions regarding the use of color clear.

Journal Covers: Please consider submitting a suggested cover image. They can be illustrations of theory, photos of organisms, a combination of the two, or alternatives. These can be uploaded with a revision of the manuscript or may be sent later. Only images for which you have copyright permission or that are not under copyright may be submitted. The color figure fee does not apply to images chosen by the Editor to be on the cover of the issue. If you have questions about possible cover designs, please email sysbio.editorialoffice@oup.com. We encourage and greatly appreciate cover image suggestions.

Data and Online Appendices: All such files should be deposited in the Dryad data repository. Also, before the manuscript can be published, data accession numbers must be in the text. Nucleotide sequence data and alignments must be submitted to GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank) or EMBL (http://www.ebi.ac.uk); alignment, input file and tree files must be submitted to TreeBASE (http://www.treebase.org); morphological data must be submitted to either Morphbank or MorphoBank. Check over your online appendices or supplemental material (if any) carefully, because they will not be copyedited or proofread, and cannot be changed later.
The first time you mention online-only material in the text of your paper, give the doi provided by Dryad as the location where the material can be found.
Then, in a separate section after the main text, include a statement such as:
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary material, including data files and/or online-only appendices, can be found in the Dryad data repository (put your Dryad doi in parentheses here).

Make sure all section headings conform to Systematic Biology style for first, second and third levels. Use of incorrect styles is potentially confusing and, in any case, is likely to delay processing of the manuscript.

Tables should have a single-sentence informative title above the table, with any other descriptive information located below the table in the form of notes and/or specific footnotes.

When references are grouped together in parentheses in the text, they should be listed in ascending chronological order. Multiple references in a single year should be alphabetized.

All funding used for this work should be listed in a "Funding" section preceding the Acknowledgements. Please give the full official name of each funding body.

Our accepted abbreviation for millions of years ago is Ma. The abbreviation for millions of years duration is myr.

Our full instructions are accessible via the link in the upper right area of the Manuscript Central page (the link goes to http://www.oxfordjournals.org/our_journals/sysbio/for_authors). In case of a discrepancy between the information at that site and this letter, follow the instructions in this letter.

If you are the first author and your manuscript is based on work done while you were a student, you would be eligible for the "Publisher's Award for Excellence in Systematic Research." When submitting your revised version be sure to indicate student work in the checkbox provided. If two student researchers were heavily involved in the manuscript, please briefly describe the situation in your cover letter.

I think that your paper will be a valuable contribution to Systematic Biology once the comments provided below are addressed. Thank you very much for your submission.

Sincerely,

Dr. Frank (Andy) Anderson
Editor-in-Chief, Systematic Biology
feander@siu.edu

Associate Editor: Prof. Olivier Gascuel
Comments to author
Recommendation #1: Accept with minor or no revisions

Recommendation #2:
Associate Editor: Gascuel, Olivier
Comments to the Author:
Dear Erick,

Thanks for submitting the revised version of your review paper “Phylogenetics and the human microbiome” to Systematic Biology (special online issue, after MCEB2013). It has been read by the same three referees as the original submission: Alexis Stamatakis, an anonymous referee (2), and Frédéric Delsuc. All three recommend acceptance with minor or no change. Actually, both of them (Alexis and Fred) recommend to publish the paper as is, and referee 2 has only minor comments on figure 2. I read the paper and reach the same conclusion. My (minor) comments are provided below. I believe that you have done a great job in putting all of these works and references together, in a very comprehensive way, with highly motivating perspectives for future research in phylogenetics. I’m thus happy to recommend acceptance with quite minor changes (mostly in figures 2 and 3).

Thanks again for your contribution, best wishes,

Olivier

Minor points:

P9 (Kuczynski et al. 2010). However

P12 “Several groups are continually revising taxonomy...” and P13 “An obvious application of phylogenetics is to perform taxonomic classification...” We have here two long and technical paragraphs (e.g. F-measure, precision and recall, but what is classified and how?). You should check this again for clarity and to ensure self-contentedness.

P16 connecting taxa in the set (Faith 1992).

Fig 1 The "graphical formulae" [l(segments) A(segments)] at the bottom of the figure do not help. This can be better described by checking-improving the figure legend, notably "the abundance of the taxa on either side of the branch" (how is it computed? give an example if there are several options)

Fig 2 Your two cases are extreme. Having one (or a few) shared (brown) edges in the right tree, and one unshared (blue or green branch) edge in the left tree would help. See also comments of referee 2.

Fig 3 and its legend, as well as the corresponding text P17-18 are quite unclear to me.... It would be interesting to have more explanations, both on the math side and on the application to sequence reads.

Reviewer(s)' comments to author:

Reviewer: 1

Recommendation: Accept with minor or no revisions

Comments:
The author has addressed all of my minor suggestions for revision and has also fully addressed the suggestions made by the other reviewers.

Thus, the paper should be published without any further revisions.

Additional Questions:

Do you wish to remain anonymous?: No

How significant is this work?: Very

Is the author aware of the background and source material to the problems set forth?: Yes

Are the conclusions justified by the evidence presented and the assumptions involved?: Yes

Are the illustrations and tables clear and understandable?: Yes

In number are they: Sufficient

Reviewer: 2

Recommendation: Accept with minor or no revisions

Comments:
As noted in my first review, I like the idea of this manuscript,and much of the content.  The revised version is very close to the first version, so I assume the author is happy with it.  I certainly appreciated the diff.pdf.

I am still not clear how the author chooses what needs technical discussion and what does not, and more technical detail has been added to this version.  However other, perhaps more technically-inclined reviewers, did not really pick this up, so, in the interests of efficiency, I won't belabour the point. The author must have a clear view who the intended audience is.

I will say that, while figure 2 does a fairly good job of illustrating the critical UniFrac method (though the common brown internal edges could be named explicitly in the caption), the definition in the text does not: "The name UniFrac is a contraction of “Unique Fraction,” which refers to the fact that the original UniFrac definition compares the fraction of edges that connect only tips from one sample via the shortest path rather than edges that connect between samples (Fig. 2; Lozupone and Knight 2005)" makes very little sense to me, particularly "edges between samples". Could this be reworded in a more intuitive way that refers explicitly to the tree(s) being inferred and the tips used to infer the trees?  So, for instance, does one infer one tree per sample and then one tree of all samples?

Additional Questions:

Do you wish to remain anonymous?: Yes

How significant is this work?: Moderately

Is the author aware of the background and source material to the problems set forth?: Yes

Are the conclusions justified by the evidence presented and the assumptions involved?: Yes

Are the illustrations and tables clear and understandable?: Yes

In number are they: Sufficient

Reviewer: 3

Recommendation: Accept with minor or no revisions

Comments:
I went through both the revised manuscript and the author’s response letter. I think that the author has made significant efforts to address all editorial and referee comments, including my own concerns. I would therefore recommend the acceptation of the revised manuscript basically as is.

Additional Questions:

Do you wish to remain anonymous?: No

How significant is this work?: Very

Is the author aware of the background and source material to the problems set forth?: Yes

Are the conclusions justified by the evidence presented and the assumptions involved?: Yes

Are the illustrations and tables clear and understandable?: Yes

In number are they: Sufficient

